System.CommandLine docs update (#46594)
dotnet/docs: docs/standard/commandline/beta5.md

Reviewer: Perhaps pedantic of me, but I recommend renaming this to `2.0.0-beta5` and generally referring to the release as `2.0.0-beta5` throughout.

---

> title: System.CommandLine beta5 breaking changes
> description: "Learn what breaking changes were introduced in beta5 and why."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: System.CommandLine 2.0.0-beta5 breaking changes
description: "Learn what breaking changes were introduced in 2.0.0-beta5 and why."
```

ms.date: 16/06/2025
no-loc: [System.CommandLine]
helpviewer_keywords:
  - "command line interface"
  - "command line"
  - "System.CommandLine"
ms.topic: how-to
---

> # Breaking changes in beta5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Breaking changes in 2.0.0-beta5
```

[!INCLUDE [scl-preview](../../../includes/scl-preview.md)]

Our main focus for beta5 was to improve the APIs and take a step toward releasing a stable version of System.CommandLine. We have simplified the APIs and made them more consistent and coherent with the [Framework design guidelines](../design-guidelines/index.md). This article describes the breaking changes that were made in beta5 and the reasoning behind them.

## Renaming

> In beta4, not all types and properties followed the [naming guidelines](../design-guidelines/naming-guidelines.md). Some were not consistent with the naming conventions, such as using the `Is` prefix for boolean properties. In beta5, we have renamed some types and properties. The following table shows the old and new names:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In 2.0.0-beta4, not all types and properties followed the [naming guidelines](../design-guidelines/naming-guidelines.md). Some were not consistent with the naming conventions, such as using the `Is` prefix for boolean properties. In 2.0.0-beta5, we have renamed some types and properties. The following table shows the old and new names:
```

- The `Symbol.Name` property is no longer `virtual`; it's now read-only and returns the name as it was provided when the symbol was created. Because of that, `Symbol.DefaultName` was removed and `Option.Name` no longer removes the `--`, `-`, or `/` or any other prefix from the longest alias.
- The `Aliases` property exposed by `Option` and `Command` is now a mutable collection. This collection no longer includes the name of the symbol.
- `System.CommandLine.Parsing.IdentifierSymbol` was removed (it was a base type for both `Command` and `Option`).

Having the name always present allows for [getting the parsed value by name](parse-and-invoke.md#getvalue):

```csharp
RootCommand command = new("The description.")
{
    new Option<int>("--number")
};

ParseResult parseResult = command.Parse(args);
int number = parseResult.GetValue<int>("--number");
```

### Creating options with aliases

> In the past, `Option<T>` was exposing plenty of constructors, some of which were accepting the name or not. Since the name is now mandatory and we expect aliases to be frequetly provided for `Option<T>`, we provide only a single constrtor. It accepts the name and a `params` array of aliases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the past, `Option<T>` exposed many constructors, some of which accepted the name. Since the name is now mandatory and we expect aliases to be frequently provided for `Option<T>`, we provide only a single constructor. It accepts the name and a `params` array of aliases.
```

Before beta5, `Option<T>` had a constructor that took a name and a description. Because of that, the second argument might now be treated as an alias rather than a description. It's the only known breaking change in the API that is not going to cause a compiler error.

> Old code that used the constructor with a description should be updated to use the new constructor that takes a name and aliases, and then set the `Description` property separately. For example:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Old code that used the constructor with a description should be updated to use the new constructor which takes a name and aliases, and then set the `Description` property separately. For example:
```

```csharp
Option<bool> beta4 = new("--help", "An option with aliases.");
beta4b.Aliases.Add("-h");
beta4b.Aliases.Add("/h");

Option<bool> beta5 = new("--help", "-h", "/h")
{
    Description = "An option with aliases."
};
```

## Default values

> In beta4, users could set default values for options and arguments by using the `SetDefaultValue` methods. Those methods were accepting an `object` value, which was not type-safe and could lead to runtime errors if the value was not compatible with the option or argument type:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In beta4, users could set default values for options and arguments by using the `SetDefaultValue` methods. Those methods accepted an `object` value, which was not type-safe and could lead to runtime errors if the value was not compatible with the option or argument type:
```

```csharp
Option<int> option = new("--number");
option.SetDefaultValue("text"); // This is not type-safe, as the value is a string, not an int.
```

Moreover, some of the `Option` and `Argument` constructors accepted a parse delegate and a boolean indicating whether the delegate was a custom parser or a default value provider. This was confusing.

> `Option<T>` and `Argument<T>` classes now have a `DefaultValueFactory` property that can be used to set the default value for the symbol. This property is invoked when the symbol is not provided in the command line input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Option<T>` and `Argument<T>` classes now have a `DefaultValueFactory` property that can be used to set a delegate that can be called to get the default value for the option or argument. This delegate is invoked when the option or argument is not found in the parsed command line input.
```

```csharp
Option<int> number = new("--number")
{
    DefaultValueFactory = _ => 42
};
```

`Argument<T>` and `Option<T>` also come with a `CustomParser` property that can be used to set a custom parser for the symbol:

```csharp
Argument<Uri> uri = new("arg")
{
    CustomParser = result =>
    {
        if (!Uri.TryCreate(result.Tokens.Single().Value, UriKind.RelativeOrAbsolute, out var uriValue))
        {
            result.AddError("Invalid URI format.");
            return null;
        }

        return uriValue;
    }
};
```

Moreover, `CustomParser` accepts  `Func<ParseResult, T>` delegate, rather than dedicated `ParseArgument` delegate. This and few other custom delegates were removed to simplify the API and reduce the number of types exposed by the API and compiled at startup time by the JIT compiler.

For more examples of how to use `DefaultValueFactory` and `CustomParser`, see the [How to customize parsing and validation in System.CommandLine](parsing-and-validation.md) document.

> ## The separation of parsing and invoking

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## The separation of parsing and invocation
```

> In beta4, it was possible to separate the parsing and invoking of commands, but it was quite unclear how to do it. The `Command` was not exposing a `Parse` method, but `CommandExtensions` was providing `Parse`, `Invoke`, and `InvokeAsync` extension methods for `Command`. This was confusing, as it was not clear which method to use and when. Following changes were made to simplify the API:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In beta4, it was possible to separate the parsing and invoking of commands, but it was quite unclear how to do it. `Command` did not expose a `Parse` method, but `CommandExtensions` provided `Parse`, `Invoke`, and `InvokeAsync` extension methods for `Command`. This was confusing, as it was not clear which method to use and when. The following changes were made to simplify the API:
```

> - `Command` now exposes a `Parse` method that returns a `ParseResult` object. This method is used to parse the command line input and return the result of the parsing. Moreover, it makes it clear that the command is not invoked, but only parsed and only in synchronous manner.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `Command` now exposes a `Parse` method that returns a `ParseResult` object. This method is used to parse the command line input and return the result of the parse operation. Moreover, it makes it clear that the command is not invoked, but only parsed and only in synchronous manner.
```

- `UseHelp` and `UseVersion` were removed. The help and version are now exposed by the [HelpOption](help.md#help-option) and [VersionOption](syntax.md#version-option) public types. They are both included by default in the options defined by [RootCommand](syntax.md#root-command).
- `UseHelpBuilder` was removed. Please read the [How to customize help in System.CommandLine](help.md) document for more information on how to customize the help output.
- `AddMiddleware` was removed. It was slowing down the application startup a lot, and since we were able to express all the features without it, we decided to remove it.
- `UseParseErrorReporting` and `UseTypoCorrections` were removed. The parse errors are now reported by default when invoking `ParseResult`. You can configure it by using the `ParseErrorAction` exposed by `ParseResult.Action` property.

```csharp
ParseResult result = rootCommand.Parse("myArgs", config);
if (result.Action is ParseErrorAction parseError)
{
    parseError.ShowTypoCorrections = true;
    parseError.ShowHelp = false;
}

> ```

Author: @gewarren Should every code block be indented with a space?

> ```

Reviewer: I think this needs to be indented because it's inside a bulleted list. This will render the code block without breaking up the list items.

- `UseLocalizationResources` and `LocalizationResources` were removed. This feature was used mostly by the `dotnet` CLI to add missing translations to `System.CommandLine`. All those translations were moved to the System.CommandLine itself, so this feature is no longer needed. If we are missing support for your language, please [report an issue](https://github.com/dotnet/command-line-api/issues/new/choose).
- `UseTokenReplacer` was removed. [Response files](syntax.md#response-files) are enabled by default, but you can disable them by setting the <xref:System.CommandLine.CommandLineConfiguration.ResponseFileTokenReplacer> property to `null`. You can also provide a custom implementation to customize how response files are processed.

Last but not least, the `IConsole` and all related interfaces (`IStandardOut`, `IStandardError`, `IStandardIn`) were removed. <xref:System.CommandLine.CommandLineConfiguration> exposes two `TextWriter` properties: `Output` and `Error`. These can be set to any `TextWriter` instance, such as a `StringWriter`, which can be used to capture output for testing. Our motivation was to expose fewer types and reuse existing abstractions.

### Invocation

> In beta4, the `ICommandHandler` interface was exposing `Invoke` and `InvokeAsync` methods that were used to invoke the parsed command. This was making it easy to mix synchronous and asynchronous code, for example by defining a synchronous handler for a command and then invoking it asynchronously (which could lead to a [deadlock](../../csharp/asynchronous-programming/index.md#dont-block-await-instead)). Moreover, it was possible to define a handler only for a command. Not for an option (like help, which displays help) or a directive.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In beta4, the `ICommandHandler` interface exposed `Invoke` and `InvokeAsync` methods that were used to invoke the parsed command. This made it easy to mix synchronous and asynchronous code, for example by defining a synchronous handler for a command and then invoking it asynchronously (which could lead to a [deadlock](../../csharp/asynchronous-programming/index.md#dont-block-await-instead)). Moreover, it was possible to define a handler only for a command, but not for an option (like help, which displays help) or a directive.
```

> We decided to introduce a new abstract base class <xref:System.CommandLine.CommandLineAction> and two derived classes: <xref:System.CommandLine.SynchronousCommandLineAction> and <xref:System.CommandLine.AsynchronousCommandLineAction>. The former is used for synchronous actions that return an `int` exit code, while the latter is used for asynchronous actions that return a `Task<int>` exit code.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A new abstract base class <xref:System.CommandLine.CommandLineAction> and two derived classes: <xref:System.CommandLine.SynchronousCommandLineAction> and <xref:System.CommandLine.AsynchronousCommandLineAction> have been introduced. The former is used for synchronous actions that return an `int` exit code, while the latter is used for asynchronous actions that return a `Task<int>` exit code.
```

{
    string? urlOptionValue = context.ParseResult.GetValueForOption(urlOption);
    var token = context.GetCancellationToken();
    returnCode = await DoRootCommand(urlOptionValue, token);
});
```

Majority of our users were not obtaining this token and passing it further. We made `CancellationToken` mandatory argument for asynchronous actions, in order for the compiler to produce a warning when it's not passed further ([CA2016](../../fundamentals/code-analysis/quality-rules/ca2016.md)).

```csharp
rootCommand.SetAction((ParseResult parseResult, CancellationToken token) =>
{
    string? urlOptionValue = parseResult.GetValue(urlOption);
    return DoRootCommandAsync(urlOptionValue, token);
});
```

As a result of these and other forementioned changes, the `InvocationContext` class got also removed. The `ParseResult` is now passed directly to the action, so you can access the parsed values and options directly from it.

To summarize these changes:

- The `ICommandHandler` interface was removed. `SynchronousCommandLineAction` and `AsynchronousCommandLineAction` were introduced.
- The `Command.SetHandler` method was renamed to `SetAction`.

> - The `Command.Handler` property was renamed to `Command.Action`. Option got extended with `Option.Action`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The `Command.Handler` property was renamed to `Command.Action`. `Option` was extended with `Option.Action`.
```

- `InvocationContext` was removed. The `ParseResult` is now passed directly to the action.

> For more details about how to use actions, see the [How to parse and invoke commands in System.CommandLine](parse-and-invoke.md) document.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more details about how to use actions, see [How to parse and invoke commands in System.CommandLine](parse-and-invoke.md).
```

## The benefits of the simplified API

We hope that the changes made in beta5 will make the API more consistent, futureproof and easier to use for existing and new users.

> The new users will need to learn fewer concepts and types, as the number of public interfaces dropped from 11 to 0, public classes (and structs) from 56 to 38. Public method count dropped from 378 to 235, and public properties from 118 to 99.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
New users need to learn fewer concepts and types, as the number of public interfaces decreased from 11 to 0, and public classes (and structs) decreased from 56 to 38. The public method count dropped from 378 to 235, and public properties from 118 to 99.
```

> We have also reduced the number of assemblies referenced by System.CommandLine from 11 to 6:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The number of assemblies referenced by System.CommandLine is reduced from 11 to 6:
```

```csharp
Option<bool> boolOption = new Option<bool>(new[] { "--bool", "-b" }, "Bool option");
Option<string> stringOption = new Option<string>(new[] { "--string", "-s" }, "String option");

RootCommand command = new RootCommand
{
    boolOption,
    stringOption
};

command.SetHandler<bool, string>(Run, boolOption, stringOption);

return new CommandLineBuilder(command).UseDefaults().Build().Invoke(args);

static void Run(bool boolean, string text)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Bool option: {text}");
    Console.WriteLine($"String option: {boolean}");
}
```

```csharp
Option<bool> boolOption = new Option<bool>("--bool", "-b") { Description = "Bool option" };
Option<string> stringOption = new Option<string>("--string", "-s") { Description = "String option" };

RootCommand command = new ()
{
    boolOption,
    stringOption,
};

command.SetAction(parseResult => Run(parseResult.GetValue(boolOption), parseResult.GetValue(stringOption)));

return new CommandLineConfiguration(command).Invoke(args);

static void Run(bool boolean, string text)
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Bool option: {text}");
    Console.WriteLine($"String option: {boolean}");
}
```

> Simplicity has also improved the performance of the library (it's a side effect of our work, not the main goal of it). The [benchmarks](https://github.com/adamsitnik/commandline-perf/tree/update) show that the parsing and invoking of commands is now faster than in beta4, especially for large commands with many options and arguments. The performance improvements are visible in both synchronous and asynchronous scenarios.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Simplicity has also improved the performance of the library (it's a side effect of the work, not the main goal of it). The [benchmarks](https://github.com/adamsitnik/commandline-perf/tree/update) show that the parsing and invoking of commands is now faster than in beta4, especially for large commands with many options and arguments. The performance improvements are visible in both synchronous and asynchronous scenarios.
```

> For the simplest app presented above, we got the following results:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the simplest app presented previously, we got the following results:
```
